[Table of Contents](index.md) | [Previous: Introduction](introduction.md) | [Next: Syntax](syntax/index.md)

---

Vocabulary
==========

> This section describes at a glance the meaning of several JSTP idioms. Most idioms are defined normatively in the next chapters but they are also presented here for faster access.

#### [Dispatch](syntax/index.md)

A JSTP message. Dispatches are both JSON serializations and the data structures representing them in the applications.

#### [Engine](engine.md)

An implementation of a JSTP node, if possible with both client and server capabilities. Since JSTP is symmetric in design, implementations should be capables of both roles (thus _server_ being a misleading designation). Implementations may however be limited to one role due to the runtime enviroment (for example while in a web browser). Engine can also refer to an running instance of a client-server compliant with this specification.

#### Emitter

The generator of the Dispatch. If the Dispatch passed through a series of Gateways, it refers to the original generator, usually a programming routine, such as the method of an object or an anonymous function. The Emitter can reside in the same application as the Engine where the Dispatch is being processed.

#### Local Emitter

An Emitter residing in the same application process as the current Engine. Typically a programming routine, such as the method of an object or an anonymous function. Local Emitters may send their Dispatches via an internal API instead of a serialized JSON form but they are still considered Emitters since they are the originators of the message and should provide [callbacks](#callback) whenever necessary.

#### Remote Emitter

The Engine that sent a Dispatch that was forwarded over a network to the current Engine. In the case of a Dispatch that came over a network, Remote Emitter refers also to the programming routine that originated the Dispatch and any other Engine that forwarded it.

#### Subscriber

Either an Engine or a programming routine that is bound to a certain Endpoint. Programming routines specify callbacks to be executed by the Engine when the endpoint gets triggered, and Engines provide an established connection where the Dispatch must be sent.

#### Channel

A Subscriber that is a remote Engine. This Subscribers are called Channels because the open network connection allows Engines to perform [reverse subscriptions](#reverse-subscription) into the remote Engine.

#### Receiver

The Engine or programming routine that got the Dispatch after it was sent to them because the Endpoint to which they were bound got triggered.

#### Morphology

A configuration of the Headers of a JSTP Dispatch designed to fulfill an specific purpose with differentiated Engine mechanics. Can be seen as a dialect or subset of JSTP.

#### Callback

A programming routine (typically an object's method or an anonymous function) to be called by a JSTP Engine when the Endpoint to which the Callback is Subscribed gets triggered by a Dispatch in process.

#### Subscription

The binding of an Callback to an Endpoint as described in the Endpoint Header of a BIND Subscription Dispatch. The Subscription is created or terminated with Subscription Dispatches.

#### Reverse Subscription

The event of an Emitter sending a Subscription Dispatch using a Channel into a remote Engine. This allows for full duplex subscription capabilities blurring in the JSTP layer the difference between the client and the server that exist in the transport protocol connection.

#### Subscription Table

The list of all current Subscriptions in a certain Engine. 

#### Answer Dispatch

An Dispatch that represents a message to the original Emitter of a Dispatch to which this new one is responding. It is used primarily by Emitters to ensure reception and correct processing of their Dispatches. Engines can issue Answer Dispatches to communicate protocol level messages, including malformation errors or network problems.

#### Transaction ID

An [UUID](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4122) identifying the generated Dispatch. When used, it must be the first element of the Token Header. 

#### Source Dispatch

The Dispatch which Transaction ID the Answer Dispatch features as the first item in the Resource Header. In other words, the Dispatch to which the Answer Dispatch is responding.

#### Application

The program in whose process the Engine runs. In a broader sense may refer to the whole application topology of a distributed system using JSTP.

#### Dispatch Cycle

The three step process in which Engines validates an incoming Dispatch, process the Headers according to the specification and performs any additional action generated by the Dispatch.

#### Dispatch Validation

The prior step in the Dispatch Cycle, in which an Engine validates the integrity of the Dispatch Headers and its consistency with the Morphology implied by the Method. An Engine may act with tolerance of excess headers or recoverable deviations from the recommendation when running in [quirks mode](#quirks-mode).

#### Dispatch Processing 

The actual processing of a Dispatch, which usually implies [triggering](#endpoint-triggering) the correponding endpoints.

#### Dispatch Forwarding

Whenever an Engine finds that the Host Header of the Dispatch instructs that it should be sent to a different Engine, the Dispatch should be forwarded to the remote engine as specified in the header. Engines may be configured so to not forward Dispatches.

#### Reverse Forwarding

Whenever an Engine forwards back a Dispatch to a remote Engine that is bound to the triggered endpoint.

#### Forwarded Dispatch

A Dispatch that was sent to this Engine by another Engine over a network.

#### [Method](syntax/method.md)

The action to be performed by re on the identified resource. It can be any of the valid method verbs: [GET](syntax/method.md#get), [POST](syntax/method.md#post), [PUT](syntax/method.md#put), [PATCH](syntax/method.md#patch), [DELETE](syntax/method.md#delete), [BIND](syntax/method.md#bind), [RELEASE](syntax/method.md#release) or [ANSWER](syntax/method.md#answer).

#### [Resource](syntax/resource.md)

The JSTP address of an actionable resource within the target application. Analog with the [representational state transfer](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer) resource definition.

#### Host

The computer in which the engine is running. Not to be confused with the [Host Header](syntax/host.md).

#### JSTP Transport Protocol

The underlying network protocol that is used to send JSTP Dispatches (that is, strings with JSON encoded data) over a network. Currently the alternatives are TCP sockets or Websockets. JSTP can be transported in other lower-level protocol provided it is full duplex. 

JSTP can also be transported in non full duplex protocols such as HTTP if a polling mechanism is in place.

#### Client

An Engine starting a network connection to another Engine in a Transport Protocol. And Engine is instructed to do this by the data in the Host Header of a Dispatch (typically resolving the given address through [DHCP](http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2131.txt) or [IP](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Protocol) ).

#### Server

An Engine attached to a server listening a port for a Transport Protocol. Note that the Engine can behave also as a Client and the Engine is not the Server per se but it is just attached to it.

#### Virtual Host

[in doubt] A target Engine that is described within an application using a domain name like address, but resides in the same application as the Emitter and does not require a network connection to be reached. Such a setup is extremely useful to keep concerns separated, since developers may want greater degree of control over the context in which the Dispatch is processed. Virtual Hosts provide the isolation benefits of different Engines without paying the penalties associated with network usage.

#### Inbound

A JSTP Transport Protocol connection where the current engine has the server role.

#### Outbound

A JSTP Transport Protocol connnection where the current engine has the client role.

#### Header

Any of the top level properties of the Dispatch object. For example: `protocol`, `method`, `body`...

#### [Endpoint](syntax/endpoint.md)

A pattern describing a series of possible Method Header and Resource Header combinations. The Endpoint mechanic is deeply inspired in REST API Endpoints. Endpoints are a Method and Resource pair where the method and parts of the Resource may be replaced by wildcards. The JSTP Endpoints are formalized and are used in subscriptions.

#### Endpoint Triggering

Whenever a Dispatch is processed the Engine calls the Callbacks provided in the Subscriptions of the endpoints that match the Dispatch and sends the Dispatch back to the Channels bound to the matching endpoints.

#### Application Level Response

A Regular Dispatch generated by an Emitter after another Dispatch triggered a endpoint to which the emitter was bound, or as a result of a programming routine started by the first Dispatch. The Dispatch emitted later in time is said to be an Application Level Response. This is just useful terminology and it is not formalized nor the emitters are required to send any response at all.

#### Protocol Level Response

An Answer Dispatch.

#### Quirks Mode

The configuration under which an Engine may ignore recoverable deviations from the recommendation and process the Dispatch anyway. 

#### Strict Mode

Under this configuration, Engines should answer a plain [400 Bad Dispatch](syntax/status-code.md#400-bad-dispatch) answer to emitters of non standard dispatches and interrupt any further processing of them.

---

[Table of Contents](index.md) | [Previous: Introduction](introduction.md) | [Next: Syntax](syntax/index.md)
